Title: Anthropologists Engage the World

----

Text: 

###Theme: Anthropologists Engage the World
AES calls for papers, panels, roundtables, workshops, walking tours and posters that explore how anthropologists, through theory and practice engage the crucial issues, movements, institutions and debates facing our world. The conference invites panels and roundtables that focus on emerging theoretical fields as well as the work of prominent theorists in anthropology. The conference aims to explore and assess anthropology’s capacity to make important interventions in public issues and shape global realities, whether through fieldwork, social critique, applied practice, activism, university teaching, public education, media engagement, or advocacy. Drawing upon the AES core commitment to combine innovative fieldwork and rich theoretical critique, the conference will consider how to elevate into the public sphere the basic research, theoretical analysis and attention to local-global intersections that are the hallmarks of anthropology.

Venue: Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT) Dubinsky Conference Center at W. 27th Street between 7th and 8th Avenue in midtown Manhattan.

Housing:
Hotels
Conference participants will arrange accommodation individually. The AES does not have a conference hotel. Preferred rate hotel rooms are available through FIT near the conference center.

Walking Tours
Thursday, April 19, 2-4pm. Spaces are limited.

Chinatown with Ken Guest
Lower East Side Gangs of New York with Brian Ferguson
The High Line and its Labor History with Julian Brash and Jeff Maskovsky
Behind the Scenes of the Boas Collections at the American Museum of Natural History with Peter Whitely
Invited Plenaries

Thursday, April 19
Ken Guest Welcome
Leith Mullings Anthropologists Engage the World
Arjun Appadurai The Future is a Cultural Fact: Anthropology in the Era of Financialization
Karen Ho Interlocutor

Friday, April 20
Anthropology and Human Rights
Ida Susser, Moderator
Don Kalb
Marc Edelman
Sally Merry
Richard Wilson

Saturday, April 21
Uprisings!
David Harvey
Jeffrey Juris
Graduate Student Papers on Occupy Wall Street
Farha Ghannam, discussant

----

Modulesettings: 

----

Lead: false