Title: Workshops

----

Text: 

###Workshops
Workshops! AESs graduate student representative, Jessica Hardin has assembled the following graduate-student workshops for the spring meetings. We are pleased to announce that AES will provide a subsidy of $160 (the cost of one night conference hotel) for graduate students who participate in any of the following four workshops (A-D). Workshop registration was deadline February 15 and was on a first come/first served basis, via an email to Jessica with required information, which is available (along with detailed workshop descriptions) at this link: Spring Workshops 2013. (We will also be hosting a grad student mixer at the meetings, details to come!)

A) Methodological and Ethical Issues in Ethnographic Research on Conflict and Violence, led by Carolyn Nordstrom (U of Notre Dame) and Sally Engle Merry (NYU) (subsidy available)

B) Managing Careers, Balancing Personal Life, led by Andrew Buckser (Purdue U) (subsidy available)

C) Becoming a Practicing Anthropologist, led by Riall Nolan (Purdue U) (subsidy available)

D) Conflict and New Media, led by Ilana Gershon (Indiana U) (subsidy available)

Recent PhDs are welcome to participate in the Becoming a Practicing Anthropologist workshop (no subsides for you, sorry!)

We also are offering a workshop at the spring meetings called Grant Proposal Writing for Recent PhDs, facilitated by Susan Greenhalgh (Harvard U) and Jeffrey Mantz (NSF) (no subsidy for this one!).

Reading salons! (Details and book descriptions here at Reading Salons) AES/APLA is happy to host four reading salons, an opportunity to discuss murder mysteries and science fiction novels with other anthropologists. Each leader has chosen a book that complements their fieldwork-based expertise. Please sign up for a reading salon and read the book in advance. Limit of 10 people to each salon.

The books discussed are:

Murder Leaves Its Mark: A Hawaii Mystery by Victoria Nalani Kneubuhl, led by Sally Engle Merry (NYU)
Cop Killer, by Maj Sjöwall and Per Wahlöö, led by Barbara Yngvesson (Hampshire College)
Three Bags Full: A Sheep Detective Story by Leonie Swann (2008), led by Tracey Heatherington (UW-Milwaukee)
The Rapture of the Nerds: A tale of singularity, posthumanity, and awkward social situations by Cory Doctorow and Charles Stross, led by Bernie Perley (UW-Milwaukee)

----

Modulesettings: 

----

Lead: false